---
id: intro-dp
title: 'Introduction to DP'
author: Michael Cao, Benjamin Qi, Jesse Choe, Neo Wang
prerequisites:
  - complete-rec
  - modular
description: 'Speeding up naive recursive solutions with memoization.'
frequency: 4
---

**Dynamic Programming** (DP) is an important algorithmic technique in
Competitive Programming from the gold division to competitions like the
International Olympiad of Informatics. By breaking down the full task into
sub-problems, DP avoids the redundant computations of brute force solutions.

Although it is not too difficult to grasp the general ideas behind DP, the
technique can be used in a diverse range of problems and is a must-know idea for
competitors in the USACO Gold division.

## General Resources

<Resources>
	<Resource source="CPH" title="7 - DP" starred>
		Great introduction that covers most classical problems. Mentions
		memoization.
	</Resource>
	<Resource
		source="TC"
		title="DP from Novice to Advanced"
		url="dynamic-programming-from-novice-to-advanced"
	>
		General tutorial, great for all skill levels
	</Resource>
	<Resource source="CPC" title="6 - DP" url="06_dynamic_programming">
		Contains examples with nonclassical problems
	</Resource>
	<Resource source="CP2" title="3.5 - DP">
		Describes many ways to solve the example problem + additional classical examples
	</Resource>
	<Resource
		source="HR@HackerRank"
		title="DP"
		url="https://www.hackerrank.com/topics/dynamic-programming"
	>
		Covers classical problems
	</Resource>
</Resources>

If you prefer watching videos instead, here are some options:

<Resources>
	<Resource
		source="Youtube"
		title="Errichto DP #1 - Fibonacci, iteration vs recursion"
		url="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YBSt1jYwVfU"
	>
		Great introduction video
	</Resource>
	<Resource
		source="Youtube"
		title="Errichto DP #2 - Coin change, double counting"
		url="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1mtvm2ubHCY"
	>
		Errichto DP video regarding coin change
	</Resource>
	<Resource
		source="Youtube"
		title="Errichto DP #3 - Line of Wines"
		url="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pwpOC1dph6U"
	>
		Errichto DP problem editorial
	</Resource>
	<Resource
		source="Youtube"
		title="WilliamFiset DP Videos"
		url="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_tur2nPkIKo&list=PLDV1Zeh2NRsAsbafOroUBnNV8fhZa7P4u"
	>
		Animated DP videos that pertain to interview questions
	</Resource>
</Resources>

<Info title="Pro Tip">

Usually, it is a good idea to write a slower solution first. For example, if the
complexity required for full points is $\mathcal{O}(N)$ and you come up with a
simple $\mathcal{O}(N^2)$ solution, then you should definitely type that up
first and earn some partial credit. Afterwards, you can rewrite parts of your
slow solution until it is of the desired complexity. The slow solution might
also serve as something to [stress test](/general/debugging-lang#stress-testing)
against.

</Info>

## Classical Problems

The next few modules provide examples of some classical problems: Dynamic
Programming problems which are well known. However, classical doesn't
necessarily mean common. Since so many competitors know about these problems,
problemsetters rarely set direct applications of them.

<!-- Solutions for most of these problems can be found in Chapter 7 of CPH.
 -->

### Problemsets

<!-- Dynamic Programming is a huge topic, so if you want more practice,  -->

<!-- Here are some other classical problemsets that we found interesting. -->

<Resources>
	<Resource
		source="CSES"
		title="DP Section"
		url="https://cses.fi/problemset/list/"
		starred
	>
		You should know how to do all of these once you're finished with the DP
		section. Editorials are available{' '}
		<a href="https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/70018">here</a>.
	</Resource>
	<Resource
		source="AC@AtCoder"
		title="DP Contest"
		url="https://atcoder.jp/contests/dp/tasks"
		starred
	>
		Some tasks are beyond the scope of Gold. An editorial for problems A-E can be found [here](https://nwatx.me/post/atcoderdp). Alternative solutions for problems A - I can be found [here](https://github.com/jessechoe10/CP/tree/master/AtCoder/DP%20Contest).
	</Resource>
	<Resource
		source="CF@Codeforces"
		title="Beginner DP Contest"
		url="https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/86532"
	>
		Beginner-friendly classical problems. Some tasks requires input/output
		files. The solutions can be found <a href="https://github.com/Farrius/div3_dp_practice">here</a> 
	</Resource>
	<Resource
		source="CF@Codeforces"
		title="DP Practice Problems"
		url="https://codeforces.com/blog/entry/67679">
		Good practice problems. You should be able to do most of these after completing the Gold DP module. Some problems might be out of the scope for gold. 
	</Resource>
</Resources>

Some of these problems will be mentioned in the next few modules.

## Introductory USACO

Easier USACO problems that don't require many optimizations or complex states.

<Info title="Note - Ordering of DP Modules">

You are **not** expected to complete all of the problems below before starting
the other DP modules. In particular, we recommend that you begin with the "easy"
problems from the [knapsack](/gold/knapsack) module if this is your first
encounter with DP.

</Info>

<Problems problems="usacoEasy" />

## Harder USACO

<!-- Finish with some more challenging Dynamic Programming problems!  -->

<!-- Can be very difficult.  -->

<!-- You might want to try easier tasks in the next few modules first. -->

<!-- so skip around if you want. -->

<Problems problems="usacoPast" />
